---
title: "Sync or Sink: Bounds on Algorithmic Collective Action with Noise and Multiple Groups"
collection: publications
category: conferences
permalink: /publication/sync_swim
excerpt: 'Provide bounds on effective collection action based on the prescence of multiple distributtions acting on a system - either due to noise in a system or multiple collectives'
date: 2025-12-06
venue: '2025 Neural Information Processing System (NeuIPS 25) Workshop on Algorithmic Collective Action'
# slidesurl: 'http://academicpages.github.io/files/slides3.pdf'
paperurl: 'https://doi.org/10.1145/3715275.3732098'
citation: 'Aditya Karan, Prabhat Kalle, Nicholas Vincent, and Hari Sundaram. 2025. Sync or Sink: Bounds on Algorithmic Collective Action with Noise and Multiple Groups. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2510.18933.'
---
Collective action against algorithmic systems, which enables groups to promote their own interests, is poised to grow. Hence, there will be growth in the size and the number of distinct collectives. Currently, there is no formal analysis of how coordination challenges within a collective can impact downstream outcomes, or how multiple collectives may affect each other's success. In this work, we aim to provide guarantees on the success of collective action in the presence of both coordination noise and multiple groups. Our insight is that data generated by either multiple collectives or by coordination noise can be viewed as originating from multiple data distributions. Using this framing, we derive bounds on the success of collective action. We conduct experiments to study the effects of noise on collective action. We find that sufficiently high levels of noise can reduce the success of collective action. In certain scenarios, large noise can sink a collective success rate from   to just under  . We identify potential trade-offs between collective size and coordination noise; for example, a collective that is twice as big but with four times more noise experiencing worse outcomes than the smaller, more coordinated one. This work highlights the importance of understanding nuanced dynamics of strategic behavior in algorithmic systems. 